


*****************************
Appendix B Defining DOER/MAKE
*****************************


If your system doesn’t have DOER and MAKE already defined, this appendix
is meant to help you install them and, if necessary, understand how they
work. Because by its nature this construct is system dependent, I’ve
included several different implementations at the end of this appendix
in the hope that one of them will work for you. If no, and if this
section doesn’t give you enough information to get them running, you
probably have an unusual system. Please don’t ask me for help; ask your
Forth vendor.

Here’s how it works. is a defining word that creates an entry with one
cell in its parameter field. That cell contains the vector address, and
is initialized to point to a no-op word called .

Children of will execute that code of , which does only two things:
fetch the vector address and place it on the return stack. That’s all.
Forth execution then continues with this address on the return stack,
which will cause the vectored function to be performed. It’s like saying
(in ’83-Standard)

.. code-block:: none
   
   ' NOTHING >BODY >R <return>

..


which executes NOTHING. (This trick only works with colon definitions.)

Here’s an illustration of the dictionary entry created when we enter

+------------+---------------------+
| DOER JOE   |                     |
+============+=====================+
|  JOE       |  pfa of NOTHING     |
+------------+---------------------+
|  header    |   parameter field   |
+------------+---------------------+

Now suppose we define:

.. code-block:: none
   
   : TEST   MAKE JOE  CR ;

..


that is, we define a word that can vector JOE to do a carriage return.

Here’s a picture of the compiled definition of TEST:

+--------+----------+-----+----------+----------+----------+
|        | adr of   |     | adr of   | adr of   | adr of   |
+--------+----------+-----+----------+----------+----------+
| TEST   | (MAKE)   | 0   | JOE      | CR       | EXIT     |
+--------+----------+-----+----------+----------+----------+
+--------+----------+-----+----------+----------+----------+

Let’s look at the code for . Since we’re using inside a colon
definition, will be true, and we’ll execute the phrase:

.. code-block:: none
   
   COMPILE (MAKE)  HERE MARKER !  0 ,

..


We can see how has compiled the address of the run-time routine, ,
followed by a zero. (We’ll explain what the zero is for, and why we save
its address in the variable , later). Now let’s look at what does when
we execute our new definition :

That’s the basic idea. But what about that cell containing zero? That’s
for the use of . Suppose we changed TEST to read:

.. code-block:: none
   
   : TEST   MAKE JOE  CR ;AND SPACE ;

..


That is, when we invoke TEST we’ll vector JOE to do a , and we’ll do a
right now. Here’s what this new version of TEST will look like:

+--------+----------+-------+----------+----------+----------+---------+----------+
|        | adr of   |       | adr of   | adr of   | adr of   |         | adr of   |
+--------+----------+-------+----------+----------+----------+---------+----------+
| TEST   | (MAKE)   | adr   | JOE      | CR       | EXIT     | SPACE   | EXIT     |
+--------+----------+-------+----------+----------+----------+---------+----------+
+--------+----------+-------+----------+----------+----------+---------+----------+

Here’s the definition of :

.. code-block:: none
   
   : ;AND   COMPILE  EXIT  HERE MARKER @ ! ;   IMMEDIATE

..


We can see that has compiled an , just as semicolon would.

Next, recall that saved the address of that cell in a variable called .
Now stores (the location of the second string of code beginning with )
into the cell previously containing zero. Now has a pointer to the place
to resume execution. The phrase

.. code-block:: none
   
   IF >R THEN

..


will leave on the return stack the address of the code beginning with .
Thus execution will skip over the code between and and continue with the
remainder of the definition up to semicolon.

The word ticks the name of a word, and stores the address of into it.

One final note: on some systems you may encounter a problem. If you use
outside of a colon definition to create a forward reference, you may not
be able to find the most recently defined word. For instance, if you
have:

.. code-block:: none
   
   : REFRAIN   DO-DAH  DO-DAH ;
   MAKE SONG  CHORUS  REFRAIN ;

..


your system might think that refrain has not been defined. The problem
is due to the placement of SMUDGE. As a solution, try rearranging the
order of definitions or, if necessary, put MAKE code inside a definition
which you then execute:

.. code-block:: none
   
   : SETUP   MAKE SONG  CHORUS  REFRAIN ;   SETUP

..


In Laboratory Microsystems PC/FORTH 2.0, the UNSMUDGE on line 9 handles
the problem. This problem does not arise with the Laxen/Perry/Harris
model.

The final screen is an example of using . After loading the block, enter

.. code-block:: none
   
   RECITAL

..


then enter

.. code-block:: none
   
   WHY?

..


followed by return, as many times as you like (you’ll get a different
reason each time).

( DOER/MAKE Shadow screen LPB 12/05/83 ) NOTHING A no-opp DOER Defines a
word whose behavior is vectorable. MARKER Saves adr for optional
continuation pointer. (MAKE) Stuffs the address of further code into the
parameter field of a doer word. MAKE Used interpretively: MAKE doer-name
forth-code ; or inside a definition: : def MAKE doer-name forth-code ;
Vectors the doer-name word to the forth-code. ;AND Allows continuation
of the “making” definition UNDO Usage: UNDO doer-name ; makes it safe to
execute

 DOER/MAKE FORTH-83 Laxen/Perry/Harris model LPB 12/05/83 : NOTHING ; :
DOER CREATE [’] NOTHING >BODY , DOES> @ >R ; VARIABLE MARKER : (MAKE) R>
DUP 2+ DUP 2+ SWAP @ >BODY ! @ ?DUP IF >R THEN ; : MAKE STATE @ IF (
compiling) COMPILE (MAKE) HERE MARKER ! 0 , ELSE HERE [COMPILE] ’ >BODY
! [COMPILE] ] THEN ; IMMEDIATE : ;AND COMPILE EXIT HERE MARKER @ ! ;
IMMEDIATE : UNDO [’] NOTHING >BODY [COMPILE] ’ >BODY ! ;

 The code in this screen is in the public domain.

( DOER/MAKE FORTH-83 Lab. Micro PC/FORTH 2.0 LPB 12/05/83 ) : NOTHING ;
: DOER CREATE [’] NOTHING >BODY , DOES> @ >R ; VARIABLE MARKER : (MAKE)
R> DUP 2+ DUP 2+ SWAP @ >BODY ! @ ?DUP IF >R THEN ; : MAKE STATE @ IF (
compiling) COMPILE (MAKE) HERE MARKER ! 0 , ELSE HERE [COMPILE] ’ >BODY
! [COMPILE] ] UNSMUDGE THEN ; IMMEDIATE : ;AND COMPILE EXIT HERE MARKER
@ ! ; IMMEDIATE : UNDO [’] NOTHING >BODY [COMPILE] ’ >BODY ! ;

( The code in this screen is in the public domain.)

( DOER/MAKE FIG model LPB 12/05/83 ) : NOTHING ; : DOES-PFA ( pfa – pfa
of child of <BUILD-DOES> ) 2+ ; : DOER <BUILDS ’ NOTHING , DOES> @ >R ;
0 VARIABLE MARKER : (MAKE) R> DUP 2+ DUP 2+ SWAP @ 2+ DOES-PFA ! @ -DUP
IF >R THEN ; : MAKE STATE @ IF ( compiling) COMPILE (MAKE) HERE MARKER !
0 , ELSE HERE [COMPILE] ’ DOES-PFA ! SMUDGE [COMPILE] ] THEN ; IMMEDIATE
: ;AND COMPILE ;S HERE MARKER @ ! ; IMMEDIATE : UNDO ’ NOTHING [COMPILE]
’ DOES-PFA ! ; ;S The code in this screen is in the public domain.

( DOER/MAKE 79-Standard MVP FORTH LPB 12/05/83 ) : NOTHING ; : DOER
CREATE ’ NOTHING , DOES> @ >R ; VARIABLE MARKER : (MAKE) R> DUP 2+ DUP
2+ SWAP @ 2+ ( pfa) ! @ ?DUP IF >R THEN ; : MAKE STATE @ IF ( compiling)
COMPILE (MAKE) HERE MARKER ! 0 , ELSE HERE [COMPILE] ’ ! [COMPILE] ]
THEN ; IMMEDIATE : ;AND COMPILE EXIT HERE MARKER @ ! ; IMMEDIATE : UNDO
[’] NOTHING [COMPILE] ’ ! ;

( The code in this screen is in the public domain.)

( TODDLER: Example of DOER/MAKE 12/01/83 ) DOER ANSWER : RECITAL CR .“
Your daddy is standing on the table. Ask him ’WHY?’ ” MAKE ANSWER .“ To
change the light bulb.” BEGIN MAKE ANSWER .“ Because it’s burned out.”
MAKE ANSWER .“ Because it was old.” MAKE ANSWER .“ Because we put it in
there a long time ago.” MAKE ANSWER .“ Because it was dark!” MAKE ANSWER
.“ Because it was night time!!” MAKE ANSWER .“ Stop saying WHY?” MAKE
ANSWER .“ Because it’s driving me crazy.” MAKE ANSWER .“ Just let me
change this light bulb!” FALSE UNTIL ; : WHY? CR ANSWER QUIT ;
