Summary
=======

Forth has often been characterized as offbeat, totally unlike any other
popular language in structure or in philosophy. On the contrary, Forth
incorporates many principles now boasted by the most contemporary
languages. Structured design, modularity, and information-hiding are
among the buzzwords of the day.

Some newer languages approach even closer to the spirit of Forth. The
language C, for instance, lets the programmer define new functions
either in C or in assembly language, as does Forth. And as with Forth,
most of C is defined in terms of functions.

But Forth extends the concepts of modularity and information-hiding
further than any other contemporary language. Forth even hides the
manner in which words are invoked and the way local arguments are
passed.

The resulting code becomes a concentrated interplay of words, the purest
expression of abstract thought. As a result, Forth programmers tend to
be more productive and to write tighter, more efficient, and better
maintainable code.

Forth may not be the ultimate language. But I believe the ultimate
language, if such a thing is possible, will more closely resemble Forth
than any other contemporary language.

99 , , and , *Structured Programming,* London, Academic Press, 1972. ,
“Program Development by Stepwise Refinement,” *Communications of ACM,*
14, No. 4 (1971), 221-27. , , and , “Structured Design,” *IBM Systems
Journal,* Vol. 13, No. 2, 1974. , “On the Criteria To Be Used in
Decomposing Systems into Modules,” *Communications of the ACM,* December
1972. and , “Specification Techniques for Data Abstractions,” *IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering,* March 1975. , “Designing Software
for Ease of Extension and Contraction,” *IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering,* March 1979. , “Adding Modules to Forth,” 1980 FORML
Proceedings, p. 71. , “Programming in the Laboratory,” unpublished
paper, 1983. , “Threaded Code,” *Communications of ACM,* Vol. 16, No. 6,
370-72. , “Indirect Threaded Code,” *Communications of ACM,* Vol. 18,
No. 6, 331. , “An Architectural Trail to Threaded-Code Systems,”
*Computer,* March, 1982. , “The R65F11 Forth Chip,” *Forth Dimensions,*
Vol. 5, No. 2, p. 25.
